In this video we'll learn about the if else statement adding an ELSE section to an if statement is the
obvious next step to improving control flow in a program.
Many times we want to perform different actions depending on whether the condition is true or false.
Again the syntax for the if statement is very simple.
We had the same syntax test for the IF section as in a simple IF statement but we add the else key word
and the statement we want to execute when the condition is false.
So in this case if the control expression is true we execute statement 1.
And if it's false we execute statement to notice the indentation.
I can't stress enough how important good indentation style is by simply looking at the construct we
can easily see both sections because it's indented properly.
In this slide you can see example code in the flowchart that visually shows the flow of control the
condition numb greater than 10 is evaluated.
If that's true we increment numb.
If it's false we assign 10 to numb.
In both cases we then continue execution to the next statement.
Let's see a few more examples.
In the first statement we check if numb is greater than 10.
If this is true we display numbers greater than 10.
If it's false we display number is not greater than 10.
And the second example we check if health is less than 100.
And real player is true if both these conditions evaluate to true.
Then we assign 100 to the player health.
Otherwise we simply increment the player health here we could see sample code along with a flowchart
that visually shows the flow of control.
Notice that in this example we're using to block statements in the if statement so if numbers greater
than 10 is true we execute both statements in the block we increment.
And we display increment if number is not greater than 10.
Then we assign 10 to numb and display reset regardless of which block statement executes we continue
processing.
Finally let's see another example where we group if else if statements.
In many cases we can group if else statements together.
Here's a common example.
Suppose I wanted to split a student's letter grade given their score on an exam.
In this case we can check if their score is greater than 90.
If it is we display an A and we're done.
No other conditions will be checked so we continue to the last output statement and display done.
Suppose the student scored a 75.
First we checked to see if a Scores greater than 90.
It isn't.
So we go to the next.
Else if.
Score greater than 80.
Again it's not true.
Then we check score greater than 70.
Now it's true so we display's see C and we're done.
No other conditions will be checked so we continue to the last output statement and display done.
Notice that the last else in the construct doesn't have an if associated with it.
This is the catch all else statement.
If none of the previous If statements is true then this L statement will execute.
An F is displayed.
This is a very very common pattern that's often seen in programming.
It's efficient since no extra checks will be performed.
Once we know which condition is true we could obviously change the logic and start with score less than
60 and work our way up to an A.
Let's head over to the ID and see some examples in live code.
I mean the code like ID.
I'm in the section 9 workspace in the if statement project.
This one is really really simple.
The user is going to enter a number and we're going to store it numb and we're going to compare the
number to a target.
In this case I just assign 10 to the target.
So we're asked to enter a number and compare it to 10 in this case.
Ok we get the number from the user and then we've got a real simple if statement.
If the number is greater than or equal to the target we're just going to display this line and then
we're going to display the number they entered is greater than or equal to the target.
That's it.
We're also going to calculate the difference between the number and the target and display the difference.
In this case in this piece right here this is the if statement right there.
That's the section that's the true section.
We're going to say Yeah the number you entered is greater than or equal to the target.
It's so far away from the it's so much greater than the target.
That's it.
Now if the number they enter is not greater than or equal to the target then the else part fires in
which case we're still going to print the line and then we're just going to say the number you entered
is less than the target.
What's the difference between target a number and we're going to display that difference as well.
OK so really really straightforward program.
Let's compile and run this.
So in this case that's entrail number of compared to 10.
Let's say I enter 10.
It says 10 is greater than or equal to 10 which it is and 10 is zero greater than 10.
Because it is 10 perfect so let's run this couple more times.
Let's put in 100 and we get 100 is greater than or equal to 10.
100 is 90 greater than 10 right.
And that's put in print in negative 10.
In this case negative 10 is less than 10 and negative 10 is 20 less than 10 which is again correct.
So you can see real simple program adding an L S. to the if statement is really really simple and actually
it's super powerful because it gives you the ability to have a binary decision and execute code on both
sides of that decision.